---
date: 2024-03-18T15:30:33+01:00
title: From Bocconi to the Twin Mountains
tags: ["hiking", "apennine mountains"]
---
Yesterday I went for a walk in the mountains. This tour starts from
[Bocconi](https://maps.app.goo.gl/BSJnhQBuqgXFN2sA8) (on the road to Muraglione
Pass) and the nice humpback bridge that is just below the village (I think it's
called "della Brusia"). 

{{< figure src=/images/bocconi3.jpg caption="Ponte della Brusia, Bocconi (FC)" >}}

It is a nice hike, with the ascent that becomes quite challenging in the final
part, towards the ridge tops, which, once reached, you'll follow for a long
time, partially on a forest road, before plunging back downhill, initially
following a lovely descending ridge da makes most of the descent quite pleasant.
During the ascent, several detours were necessary to get around the landslides
that originated during the infamous May floods (there are still several traffic
lights on the roadway leading up from Forl√¨, all due to the restoration works
following the flood). Hats off to the volunteers who maintain the trail: they
have had to work hard this year. At some point, they had to 'dug out' complete
new sections to get around the more enormous landslides. 

Primroses, wild saffron, and buttercup suggest that, yes, we are indeed entering
spring. All of this botanic expertise is due to
[PlantNet](https://plantnet.org/en/), the app I installed the other day, which
works well, except that it has to be online, which is only rarely possible on
the trail. Fortunately, it can also be used on previously taken photos, which I
did once I was back in Bocconi. I also installed an app to recognize birdsong;
it's called [Merlin Bird ID](https://merlin.allaboutbirds.org), received a lot
of praise, and should work offline, but I have yet to try it. 

{{< figure src=/images/bocconi1.jpg caption="As is often the case in the Apennines, rural ruins are encountered on the trail." >}}

The best moment was the twenty or so minutes I spent lying down to rest at the
highest point before embarking on the descent. I listened to the silence that
silence was not: the sounds of the forest, the birds, the wind, the heat of the
sun on my skin. My mind wanted to divert to new paths, and I tended to fall
asleep several times, but I consciously tried to bring my mind back to
listening. A meditation exercise that restored my energy levels: I felt
recharged and rested when I got up.

{{< figure src=/images/bocconi2.jpg caption="A warm day for mid-March, and breezy with partly cloudy skies." >}}

At the start, be careful not to take the trail in reverse (as I initially did):
after crossing the beautiful humpback bridge known as the Brusia, do not take
the trail directly in front of you, but turn sharply left, walk about 30 meters
above the Montone river, then take the trail to the right, marked "Valbura".

GPX track and some photos [here](https://www.outdooractive.com/en/route/hiking-route/province-of-forli-cesena/da-bocconi-verso-i-monti-gemelli/284291423/).